In January of 2020, we started seeing news reports about a disease outbreak in Wuhan, China.
Now at the time, it seemed localized and was not a global concern.
But a short time later, the numbers were going up as the virus began to spread.
Borders were closing, and airports were shutting down.
On January 22nd, the Coordinators Committee received their first letter from a branch about the coronavirus.
The letter was from the Korea branch. Soon after that, we wrote to all branches in and around Asia,
and included guidelines on what to do if they had an outbreak in their territory.
We had dealt with local epidemics before, but nothing like this on a worldwide scale.
It was clear that the virus is going to affect almost every aspect of our theocratic operations.
And during those first few months of 2020, the organization would be faced with a huge amount of decisions.
You have to realize that this was catching us right in the middle of our activities.
Our schedule for the whole year had already been planned.
We had shepherding visits to branches, regional conventions, even special conventions.
And now, we had Gilead graduation and memorial coming up right in front of us.
What were we going to do?
One of the first things the governing body decided was that the Coordinators Committee would become the central channel of communication regarding COVID-19.
Meanwhile, the graduation of the 148th Class of Gilead was in two weeks.
Should we have guests come? Should there be a live audience? There was not much time to make these decisions.
However, after prayer and discussion, the entire governing body decided not to have a live audience for the Gilead graduation that weekend.
That was unheard of.
The next thing we needed to figure out was whether to lock down headquarters at Bethel.
I clearly remember it was a Friday night, March 13th.
We were getting reports of COVID cases in the congregations around Bethel.
And we also knew that the Bethelites would be going out to their congregation and other activities over the weekend.
If we were going to do something, we needed to do it quickly.
We called each member of the governing body and explained the situation.
And all were unanimous that we should lock down Bethel immediately.
So within the hour, a message went to the entire headquarters in the United States Bethel family to stay in.
And if you were out, to return to Bethel immediately.
Sometime later, we learned that there were some COVID cases at Patterson.
If we had moved ahead, potentially, we could have spread COVID through the whole Bethel family.
We really felt Jehovah's protective hand.
The same weekend as the Gilead graduation, the Memorial invitation campaign was scheduled to begin.
And so branches were asking, is it safe to go door to door and to distribute invitations?
What if we can't meet in our kingdom halls?
As the virus had spread in many countries, it became evident that we needed to suspend the public ministry.
This was a very serious decision.
But when we prayerfully analyzed the situation, we realized we would not be showing respect for the sanctity of life or love of neighbor if we continued house to house.
Our preaching work shifted to letter writing and telephone witnessing.
And what a huge witness has been given in this way.
It was amazing to me personally when I saw how quickly the brothers could adapt to using Zoom, phone witnessing, letter writing.
And instead of it being a huge setback for the work, it was almost as though the work even moved ahead.
We were also having to deal with what to do about our kingdom halls and our meetings.
Initially, some of the brothers were thinking, maybe we could just simply watch the pre-recorded meetings on JW Stream.
Well, while that's an excellent provision, if we were going to do this for a long time, it would be wonderful to use a tool that would allow the brothers and sisters to come together virtually,
to be able to interact and have that interchange of encouragement.
We knew that a few branches had already started using Zoom for congregation meetings, and we wondered, could this tool be used for congregation meetings globally?
So we asked those branches for their recommendations on how we could use this tool further.
We got their comments, we did some testing, and then the governing body approved the global use of Zoom for meetings.
At the same time though, the coordinators committee urgently wanted to help those congregations to arrange dignified Zoom meetings.
And so within a week, technical and theocratic guidelines were released to all congregations.
Then shortly after that, tens of thousands of Zoom licenses were purchased and then provided to many congregations as part of the disaster relief arrangement.
However, not all publishers could use Zoom due to lack of internet.
So in the days leading up to the campaign, the governing body provided direction to all branches and how to handle those exact situations.
They also announced that the memorial talk itself would be made available on JW.org.
So one branch wrote in and asked if they could use television and radio broadcasting.
And we thought, that's a good idea.
Let's try it.
Once we saw how well it worked in that country, television and radio were approved for all branches in Africa only two days before the memorial.
How thrilling it was for many friends in Africa to find out even moments before the broadcast began that they would be able to commemorate the memorial simultaneously with their brothers and sisters throughout the country.
To have the memorial without being able to meet together was so different for all of us.
Can you imagine for the 2021 memorial, there was an all-time peak of 21,367,603.
Clearly, we have seen Jehovah's blessing on these arrangements.
While all these new arrangements were being made at a rapid pace, the usual work of the coordinators committee office didn't stop because of the pandemic.
We still had to deal with the king of the north, persecuting our brothers.
We still had disasters and many other things to contend with.
In fact, we handled twice as many disasters in the 2020 service year in the middle of the pandemic than we did in 2018.
On a daily basis, we saw clear evidence that we are living in the last days.
We had to come up with guidelines to help branches determine what aspects of relief work could be postponed and at the same time ensure that urgent or necessary work went ahead safely.
While there's no doubt that the pandemic complicated disaster relief efforts considerably, it was so faith strengthening to see that the governing body refused to allow those complications to prevent them from caring for our brothers.
In addition to the impact these disasters had on our brothers, in some countries our brothers couldn't even get enough food for their daily needs.
This could have been because of government restrictions, supply issues, or other circumstances that wouldn't allow the brothers to work.
Literally, the branches had to arrange to provide their daily bread.
The branches were encouraged to establish disaster relief committees to care for the needs on a local level.
Reminders were provided to help families try to prepare a reserve of food if at all possible in case the situation became worse.
Of course, the virus affected not only our meetings at the Kingdom Hall, but also our circuit assemblies, regional conventions, and special conventions.
For the governing body decided to cancel all live regional and special conventions for 2020.
That led to a landmark convention program on JW.org that the entire brotherhood enjoyed.
That same week in March, we approved that a JW broadcasting news release about the coronavirus outbreak be developed.
So interviews and scripts were prepared during that Gilead graduation weekend, and the program was recorded and released the following week.
The governing body updates have been an important way for us to shepherd the entire organization during the pandemic.
Well, once vaccinations became more prevalent, we faced another challenge.
The United States branch was struggling to get vaccines for those in the Bethel family who wanted them.
So in early April 2021, we called together a meeting.
We had all the key individuals there from the various departments, and everyone was given an assignment.
And within two weeks, we had enough vaccine to vaccinate everyone in the US Bethel family who chose to be vaccinated.
Well, about a week later, we sent a letter to all branches encouraging them to investigate the availability of vaccines for special full-time servants.
We were especially concerned about special full-time servants serving in lands where the government was not yet making vaccines available.
After that direction went out, we had a tremendous response from a number of branches who were able to obtain vaccines for special full-time servants who wanted to receive them.
Several branches said that it had seemed impossible to get vaccines in their country at that moment.
But they prayed about it, they followed the direction, and then either that same day, or the very next day, Jehovah opened the doors, and suddenly they had the vaccine.
All of these events occurred rapidly.
And even though it was difficult to make so many adjustments in such a short period of time, we could see Jehovah's hand in the governing body's decisions.
Television, radio, video conferencing have all served our brothers well.
With just goes to show that Jehovah was guiding the governing body as they made these decisions so early in the pandemic.
You know, we've always appreciated the direction we received from the faithful slave, but at that unique time, especially, it was so encouraging to see Jehovah use them to make these major decisions, and they made many that one week in March.
Although there have been many challenges and sad times during the pandemic, it's been amazing to see many positive developments.
So many inactive ones have returned. So many Bible studies have been started.
We saw how Jehovah guided us through, decision by decision, step by step, and seeing how Jehovah led us through this situation has helped me to see that, regardless of what is going to come up in the future, Jehovah is going to do the same thing.
Like scripture say, we get our plates. Yeah, those times, but overall, when you're in Jehovah's arms, what's the worry?
You could say every one of the governing bodies faith was strengthened as we got through this trial, and it's just a continuous thing of our faith being built up and how Jehovah is directing us, and he's preparing his people for life in that new world. The real life is coming.
It's been a real privilege to see Jehovah spirit in action during this pandemic.
It strengthened our faith to see him use the governing body to provide scripturally based direction, keep the kingdom work going, and all the while showing respect for life.
As a result, our trust in Jehovah's organization is stronger than ever before, and building this trust now is vital because Jehovah is preparing us for faith.
It's important for us for future events, including the Great Tribulation.